Add blog post on backlog cleanup (#398)
trinodb/trino.io: _posts/2023-01-10-cleaning-up-the-trino-backlog.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Cleaning up the Trino pull request backlog"
author: "Cole Bowden"

> excerpt_separator: <!--more-->

Reviewer: Need a highlight image

---

> At every point in an open source project's lifecycle, it *will* reach a point

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At some point in the lifecycle of a successful open source project, it *reaches* a point
```

> where the number of incoming pull requests outpace the project's ability to get

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where the number of incoming pull requests (PRs) outpace the project's ability to get
```

> code merged. It happens for a huge variety of reasons, whether that be

Reviewer: can we avoid "whether that be"

developers moving on to other projects before tying up every loose end,

> reviewers who miss a request for review (the GitHub notification system doesn't

Reviewer: Move the notification thing into a separate sentence.

do anyone any favors), or because there's a few dozen open PRs which were never
going to happen and should have been closed two years ago. Having too many open

> PRs can be a problem for a project, because they make it harder to tell what is 

Reviewer: is a problem

in the process of going through all open PRs, from oldest to newest, manually
taking a look at each one and checking in on how we may want to proceed. For PRs
where the author seems to have gone dark and not responded to a review, we close
them down, encouraging the authors to open them right back up if they decide
they want to continue work. For everything else, though, we've been taking a
more measured approach, offering to help facilitate reviews or discussion for
these long-lasting bits of code that may still have a chance of making their way
into Trino.

To anyone who's managed a repository before, this may seem like more effort than
necessary. You can add a bot to close anything that's been stale or inactive for
too long, and problem solved, right? Sure, that does solve the problem, but it
creates a couple others.

First, and perhaps most importantly: it's not very human. Having a pull request
that you put time and effort into get shut down by a bot without having another
person swing by to say hello can be demoralizing, and it builds a negative
experience that might discourage future contributions to the project. We want

> our contributors to like Trino and to enjoy the process of adding on to it, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
our contributors to like the Trino community and to enjoy the process of adding on to it, and
```

Author: I think this loses meaning.

in the pull request backlog. That's not a good experience for the contributor,
and it's not good for Trino, either, because that contribution could have a lot
of value. We plan on stopping this from happening by implementing workflows
which spring Trino developer relations into action when these situations arise.
If a pull request goes a few days without a comment, we'll be the safety net to
ask questions, get engineers involved, and make sure that at least a few pairs
of eyes take a look at every incoming PR in a timely manner.

The second category is pull requests that get some reviews, but eventually
stagnate or stop being actively worked on. This happens for a lot of reasons,
but in all cases, if a pull request goes a few weeks with no activity, the
developer relations team will be checking in. Our goal will be to figure out the
proper path forward, whether that's flagging down some reviewers again,
communicating that the pull request should be closed, or anything else. The end
result should be that nothing slips through the cracks and ends up going months
without human contact. If an author vanishes or everyone gets too busy to look

> at a pull request again, though, the final stop will ultimately be a stale bot

Reviewer: Will it ? Or we just going manual .. might easy enough..

Author: Yeah, we've already got buy-in from maintainers on that.

which closes pull requests that have gone a few months with no activity.

With all these processes in place, contributors should never feel like their
efforts are going unnoticed. Submitted code should be reviewed quickly,
iterated on in a timely manner, and merged without much delay. In situations

> where a pull request is *not* going to be merged, the Trino developer relations
> should be able to chime in quickly to make that clear, saving contributors from

Author: ```suggestion
where a pull request is *not* going to be merged, the Trino developer relations
team should be able to chime in quickly to make that clear, saving contributors from
```

Author: Just commenting this so I don't forget, I'll tackle it when addressing other feedback.
